The following document contains the comments received from reviewers and
our responses for sc-2017-036524.

**Reviewer: 1**

**Comments:** **This manuscript reports an analysis of the free energy
diagrams for photocatalytic conversion of dinitrogen to ammonia over
rutile (110) model surface. The results indicate that nitrogen reduction
is improbable, but the N-N bond cleavage is thermodynamically facile on
rutile (110) through an oxidative pathway with the strong oxidative
driving force provided by photogenerated holes. This manuscript may be
published in ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering after revisions
after addressing the following issues.**

We appreciate the positive perspective, and the detailed and thoughtful
comments below. We have addressed each comment point-by-point and now
feel that the manuscript is significantly stronger. **1. Abstract should
be improved to emphasis the importance of the study.**

Thank you for this suggestion. We have added two phrases to the abstract
to highlight the novelty and importance of this study: “This is the
first application of computational techniques to photocatalytic nitrogen
fixation” and “This work provides strong evidence against the most
commonly reported experimental hypotheses”. We hope that this helps
potential readers recognize the significance of the work. **2. I am
curious how the authors have hypothesized that rutile (110) is active
surface for nitrogen fixation. Please describe the reason in details.**

The rutile (110) is the lowest-energy surface of rutile, and has been
previously hypothesized by other groups. We have added a discussion of
this in the introduction:

“The rutile (110) surface is hypothesized to be the active surface for
due to the fact that photocatalytic nitrogen fixation rates have been
observed to correlate with the amount of rutile in TiO$_2$ samples; the
(110) surface is the lowest energy surface on rutile and is likely to
provide a model for other rutile surfaces. Furthermore, the rutile (110)
surface has been explicitly hypothesized to be the active surface in
recent experimental work.” **3. Band edges of rutile TiO2 and redox
potentials are shown in Figure 3, but there is no citation. Necessary
citations are suggested to be added in the manuscript.**

The reviewer is correct that these citations should appear in the
caption, and they have now been added. We note that they previously
appeared in the methods section, but realize that this is inconvenient.
**4. The band gap shown in Figure 3 is much larger than 3.0 eV, which is
usually reported optical band gap of rutile TiO2.**

We thank the reviewer for their astuteness in recognizing this issue. It
seems that the band gap was 3.2 eV, consistent with anatase (rather than
rutile). Fortunately this mistake was isolated to Fig. 3, and we
confirmed that the oxidative potentials in free energy diagrams were
computed using the correct band gap of 3 eV. **5. It is well known that
pristine rutile is not active for hydrogen evolution reaction.
Therefore, selective reduction of nitrogen to ammonia over pristine TiO2
may not be challenging even though the redox potential is near SHE.**

We agree with the reviewer, though we have been unable to find an
experimental study of hydrogen evolution on pristine rutile (likely due
to its low activity). The fact that seems most surprising is that TiO2
is capable of dissociating the strong N-N bond more easily than it can
dissociate the much weaker H-H bond. This is at the heart of the
selectivity challenge, and we would argue that finding a catalyst with a
high H2 evolution overpotential only solves the easy part of the
challenge. We have tried to clarify this with the following addition to
the introduction:

“...indicating that TiO$_2$ is capable of dissociating the strong N-N
bond more easily than the much weaker H-H bond”. **6. The first step for
dissociative nitrogen reduction is scission of the N-N bond. This step
is not photoexcited process of TiO2. Therefore, the reviewer thinks that
the high energy barrier is routinely accepted. Are there any pathway for
the activation of nitrogen by photoexcited electrons? For example, N2\*
+ \* + H+ + e- NH\* + N\*.**

The reviewer is correct that the chemical nature of the N-N scission
suggests that a photon/electron mediated process would be needed to
exploit the photocatalytic driving force, although we point out that
this has not stopped other authors from hypothesizing the direct
dissociation pathway. Specifically, we chose to address the direct
dissociation pathway because it has been explicitly hypothesized by
Hirakawa et. al., and because it represents one “extreme” of the
reaction mechanism. Clearly, there is potential for “mixed” mechanisms
with dissociation of N2Hx species. However, these mechanisms still lead
to the formation of N\* or NH\* which are exceedingly unstable on the
pristine and Fe-doped surfaces, and hence can be ruled out even with the
modest 0.15 V overpotential. The exception is the oxygen defect, where
NHx species are much more stabile; however, N\* is still very unstable,
indicating that formation of HNNH is still required. Since this is the
potential-limiting step for the associative mechanism we suggest that
there is little advantage to showing the thermodynamics of the mixed
mechanisms, though these should certainly be considered in more advanced
studies with kinetics included.

We have addressed this possibility with two comments:

“The same stabilization would be required for NH\* species, effectively
eliminating any pathway involving NH\* (e.g. dissociation of NNH).
Adsorbed NH$_2$ species are somewhat more stable, and may exist under
solvated conditions, opening the possibility of mechanisms involving
dissociation of N2Hx&gt;2 species, similar to the associative mechanism
that will be discussed subsequently.”

“An alternative possibility is a mixed mechanism proceeding through
dissociaton of partially hydrogenated species, since the NHx species are
stable at the O-br vacancy; however, this would still necessitate the
formation of the potential-limiting HNNH\* species from the associative
mechanism and would be thermodynamically (though not kinetically)
equivalent.” (page 17)

**7. Equations 7–12 are incorrect.**

Again, we thank the reviewer for astuteness. The prior version listed
the dissociative mechanism twice due to an error, which has now been
rectified. **8. In the caption of Figure 9, “the conduction band edge”
may be “the valence band edge”.**

Thanks to the reviewer for catching this typo, we have corrected it in
the current version. **9. Figure 10 was not referred in the
manuscript.**

Thanks for catching another oversight; we have fixed this. We discussed
the general idea in the original text but never referred to the figure.
A more detailed discussion of these results has been added along with a
reference to the figure. **10. It is suggested that nitrogen is first
oxidized to nitric oxide and subsequently reduced to ammonia. If so,
there are reduction pathways of NO into N2 and N2O in addition to NH3.
Detailed discussions are necessary since the proposed mechanism is
speculative.**

The reviewer is correct regarding the possibility of back-reactions.
This has been observed experimentally by Yates and colleagues in UHV
conditions (see C. N. Rusu and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 104, p.
1729, 2000 and C. N. Rusu and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 105, p.
2596, 2001 – both cited in the manuscript). A detailed investigation of
this is beyond the scope of this paper, but we have now pointed out this
challenge and added some additional discussion:

“However, reduction of nitrogen oxides is a complex process that can
also form partially reduced species such as N$_2$O or N$_2$. In
particular, the reaction of NO to N$_2$O and the reaction of N$_2$O to
N$_2$ has been observed under UHV conditions by Yates and colleagues.
Fully understanding the selectivity of photocatalytic NO reduction on
TiO$_2$ is beyond the scope of this work, but selectivity should be
considered in future studies of NO reduction.”

**11. There are typo, for example, “the the” in Line 2 on page 6.**

Thank you for catching this typo. We have proof-read the manuscript for
others and hope that none are remaining. **12. Abbreviation should be
explained when it first appears in the text.**

We thank the reviewer for catching this oversight. The manuscript has
been changed to explain each abbreviation when it is introduced. **13.
The format of the references should be unified according to the
requirements of this journal.**

Thanks for catching this, we have modified the reference formatting to
be consistent with the journal requirements.

**Reviewer: 2**

**Comments:** **I understand that the authors have chosen to remove the
experimental data which was superfluous due to already published data by
others as pointed out by one of the reviewers. As it stands, I do not
recommend this paper for publication in EES since it only presents
computational data that does not explain the experimental findings nor
suggests a reaction mechanism instead it focuses on excluding a number
of reaction mechanisms. Therefore, I think this manuscript would be
better suited in a more technical computational journal.**

We respectfully disagree with this reviewer’s assessment, and feel that
the work addresses a number of specific hypotheses that appear in the
experimental literature, while also suggesting others for future
testing. This should make the manuscript accessible to experimentalists,
and also provide experimentalists with ideas for additional studies.
Contrary to the reviewer’s comment, we explicitly propose a reaction
mechanism (indirect reduction) that is thermodynamically plausible and
does not appear elsewhere in the literature. We believe that this
hypothesis-driven approach is an efficient way to communicate knowledge
between experimental and computational studies. The goal of the
scientific method is to test hypotheses, and we feel that conclusively
disproving a hypothesis is of similar value to proving one. Given the
nature of the work we feel that EES is an appropriate outlet. The more
technical journals suggested tend to focus more heavily on method
verification or development rather than hypothesis testing.

**Reviewer: 3**

**Comments:** **This study applies density functional theory
calculations to examine the elementary reaction free energies associated
with nitrogen reduction on the rutile TiO2 (110) surface. The results
presented illustrate well that the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia is
not energetically feasible on the pristine, stoichiometric surface. Some
consideration of oxygen vacancies and doped Fe looks promising and is
considered at a relatively basic level, as well as potential other
conversion routes that include first oxidation followed by reduction.
The overall conclusions are interesting, and the resulted are presented
with limitations clearly highlighted. The limitations in the analysis
are quite severe, as there is no direct consideration of elementary
kinetics (ie, barriers), and catalytic kinetics are, of course,
generally dictated by barriers and not reaction energies. However, in
this study, large differences in reaction energies are sufficient to
make some interesting qualitative conclusions. Other major limitations
in the modeling approach include the lack of consideration of
interfacial solvation and charging in the photoelectrocatalytic system.
Again, though these are significant limitations, the large energetic
differences make qualitative conclusions still generally well supported
by the more simplistic analysis. As these limitations are highlighted
for the reader and discussed, I recommend publication following
consideration of the following significant comments.**\
We thank the reviewer for this positive assessment, and are grateful for
their ability to recognize the considerable value provided by the
relatively simple models employed. Further, the constructive criticism
provided is very useful and we have revised and improved the manuscript
accordingly. **1) I have a number of comments regarding the
consideration of the stable state of the surface under reaction
conditions, the first section of results.**\
**a. It is unclear what the difference between the “gas” and “aqueous”
conditions are in the discussion of these results. The authors note that
the gas phase is humidified, and presuming 100% humidity, the chemical
potential of gas phase water and liquid water would be equivalent. The
chemical potential of water in the aqueous system is noted as being
calculated directly from the saturation pressure of water (ie, 100% RH),
and from what I can tell, the water chemical potential is the only thing
that could differentiate the two conditions in their modeling approach.
Did the authors consider the “gas” conditions as 0% relative humidity,
and the “aqueous” conditions as 100% relative humidity? If so, this
should be clarified, and discussed why 0% RH would be the relevant “gas”
phase conditions given this system would presumably be exposed to
ambient air.**

The reviewer is correct, and we apologize for the previous ambiguity.
The original figure had all values for chemical potential set to 1 atm
except the value being modified. for Example in plot c, the chemical
potential of N$_2$ and O$_2$ were set to 1 atm, while the chemical
potential of water was modified. We realize this does not reflect
experimental conditions, but was generated this way to get a general
overview of coverages at low and high pressure. We have revised the
figures to track more realistic chemical systems. Plots a-c have been
revised such that the chemical potential of N$_2$ and O$_2$ have been
set to 0.8 atm and 0.2 atm respectively as the chemical potential of
water is modified, with zero representing liquid water. Plots d-f have
the chemical potential of water set to 0.035 atm and O$_2$ set to 0.2
atm while N2 is moddified, with zero being set to 0.8 atm. The plots
intersect at 0, reflecting the fact that the free energy of liquid water
is equal to the free energy of water vapor at 100 % RH.

**b. In Figure 2, to make the plots on the left (a, b, and c), I believe
a constant value of the chemical potential of N2 must have been assumed.
On the right (d-f), a constant chemical potential of water must have
been assumed. The authors should clarify what values were used for these
species in making these plots.**

The reviewer is correct and we thank them for noting this, omitting this
fact was an oversight. The main text has been clarified. The chemical
potential of water is set to 100% relative humidity.

**c. In making these plots, the authors have only considered adsorbed
N2, whereas the steady state system operating photocatalytically would
attain a surface potential, and formation of stable NxHy species would
be possible. As the authors show, adsorbed NH3 (and other species under
certain conditions) can be more stable than adsorbed N2 under operating
conditions. The authors might consider making diagrams at a presumed
operating potential to consider if the surface would attain
(thermodynamically) a high coverage of NHx species. Similarly, operating
conditions could cause the reduction of surface O atoms (ie, the
adsorption of H or formation of surface O vacancies), and this was not
considered.**

The reviewer is correct that formation of NxHy species is possible, and
a thermodynamic analysis of the process including all species would show
high coverages of NHx species. However, we know that this process is
kinetically slow in practice due to N-N bond scission. We suspect a high
kinetic barrier to exist somewhere in the system, however our analysis
is unable to display this. Because of this limitation, we have chosen to
only use the reactants, as they are likely to dominate under real
reaction conditions. In order to properly estimate the coverages of
these species we would also need to include the concentration of
ammonium ions, hydrazine, and nitrites/nitrates; however, these
quantities are not well-known experimentally and would require a kinetic
model to estimate. Nonetheless, we expect that the concentrations would
all be relatively low, creating a driving force to remove NHx and NOx
surface species. We have produced figures for this analysis under both
oxidizing and reducing band edges and included it in the supplementary
material.

**2) I am a bit confused as to the distinction between routes that first
undergo oxidation and those that initiate through reduction, given the
surface of TiO2 has O atoms. It appears the difference between N2O\* and
N2\* is that an excess O atom is present. However, presumably N2\* could
form by creating an O vacancy, appearing as “N2O\* adsorbed with a
vacancy nearby.” Or, wouldn’t N2 reduction occurring on a surface that
had excess O\* to begin with be mechanistically equivalent to the “NO”
route? Presumably N2 would adsorb to an O rather than the Ti if the
surface was overoxidized.**

Regarding the first part of the comment, N2 does not adsorb at an O-br
site unless it is constrained, indicating that this is not a viable
route to formation of an oxygen vacancy. However, in the case of excess
O\* the reviewer make a good point regarding direct adsorption of N2 to
a surface O\*. Indeed this is (slightly) more energetically favorable
than independent adsorption, and hence we have changed the mechanism for
N2 $\rightarrow$ NO to involve direct adsorption to O\*. In the case of
reduction from this “N2O” state, we note that the formation of O\* is
not favorable under reducing conditions, making this unlikely. However,
a “mixed” path involving N2O formation and subsequent reduction is
plausible, though this would involve N-N scission through an ONNHx
species, which opens up considerably more possibilities that are beyond
the scope of this work (though we are working on similar mechanisms for
future work).

This comment has been addressed by modifying the N2 $\rightarrow$ NO
free energy diagram and a discussion of the direct adsorption of N2 to
O\*.

**3) The authors state in the conclusions “defects are not predicted to
be thermodynamically stable under operating conditions.” The basis for
this conclusion is unclear – I don’t see a consideration of the
reduction of surface O atoms to form water and a vacancy considered in
the paper.**

The formation energy for oxygen defects discussed in the text (1.54 eV)
is the energy required to reduce the surface oxygen atoms to form water.
This was not stated explicitly which likely led to confusion. We have
added the reactions of each defect formation energy in the supplementary
information to clarify the reference states.

**4) The consideration of Fe doping is rather basic, as the authors do
not appear to have considered whether Fe doping would alter the stable
state of the surface. Fe doping forces formation of a Fe4+ formal
species, though reduction to Fe3+ or Fe2+ would be much more likely
under N2 reduction conditions (see Fe Pourbaix diagram). A Fe2+ model
would be relatively easy for the authors to consider, as this would
likely form simply by having Fe doping occur together with an O vacancy
formation. Fe3+ could be modeled with two Fe dopants and a vacancy.
These would be much more realistic models of the Fe doped system. Some
discussion of this large limitation in the Fe doping consideration
should be added, or possibly the Fe doping analysis simply removed. In
its current form, I would consider the Fe doping calculations done
possibly misleading.**

This is a very good suggestion. The iron site was added due to a request
during the first round of revision, and the model in our paper was
chosen for simplicity. However, the reviewer’s point regarding Fe formal
oxidation states is a good one, and indicates that more realistic models
can be created rather simply. We have tested the Fe3+ and Fe2+ sites
suggested and found that an Fe2+ site is more stable than the original
model. We have repeated the analysis on this site and replaced the free
energy diagrams in the main text with these, and added a comparison of
the two sites in the SI. The new results have not altered the main
conclusions of the paper as the barrier to nitrogen dissociation and the
first hydrogenation is still very large; however, the new site is more
stable even than the O-br defect, and has an appreciable N2 binding
energy, which could have implications in future studies. We have revised
and expanded the discussion as follows:

“Two defects were considered, an Fe$^{4+}$ defect arising from direct
substitution of the 5-fold Ti atom, and an Fe$^{2+}$ defect formed by
substitution of a Ti atom beneath a bridging O and removal of the
bridging O, effectively forming a O-br defect and Fe substitution (see
the Supplementary Information for visualization of the slab). The
Fe$^{2+}$ defect was found to be more stable, and Fig. 7 shows the
energetics of the associative pathway with an iron-substituted rutile
(110) surface (a comparison of the free energy path for the Fe$^{4+}$
defect is available in the Supplementary Information). This mechanism is
very similar to the mechanism on the pristine and O-br vacancies, with
the slight difference that N-NH$_2$ is more stable than HNNH on the Fe
defect. The limiting potential of 2.2 eV is comparable to that of the
defected surface in Fig. 6 (1.7 eV), but is slightly higher due to the
stronger adsorption of N$_2$. The energetics of the associative pathway
on Fe-substitution defects are compared directly to O-br defects and
pristine rutile (110) in Fig. 8a, illustrating that the Fe-substitution
defect has a similar effect to the O-br vacancy. The energy required to
form this defect was calculated to be 1.1 eV relative to bulk rutile and
BCC iron. This moderate formation energy is lower than that of the O-br
defect, and N$_2$ adsorbs with a relatively strong binding energy of
-0.5 eV. This suggests that Fe surface defects promote the formation of
O-br vacancies and adsorption of N$_2$. Nonetheless, the high limiting
potential of 2.2 V indicates that the Fe-substitution defect is not
active for photocatalytic nitrogen reduction.”

**a. In the Fe doped section, I did not understand the statement “The
energy required to form this defect was calculated to be 2 eV relative
to bulk rutile and BCC iron.” Such a consideration would require at
least knowing the chemical potential of O (or that of water, protons,
and an electrochemical potential), so it is unclear the basis on which
it was concluded Fe doping was unstable.**

We see now that this is ambiguous. For this energy, the iron reference
is BCC iron, the proton and electron reference is set by the reversible
hydrogen electrode at zero potential, the oxygen reference is set by
gaseous water at saturation pressure at 300K and the titanium reference
is set by the TiO$_2$ bulk calculation. We have clarified this by
including the reaction for defect formation in the SI. **5) Bottom of
page 22, “reference hydrogen electrode” should be “reversible hydrogen
electrode.”**

Thanks to the reviewer for catching this typo; we have corrected this in
the manuscript. **6) Page 23 – The potentials given for holes and
excited electrons should be clarified as to what is the reference
scale.**

The reviewer is correct that the approach used may be confusing, and we
have clarified this in the methods section. We have chosen to treat
holes/electron potentials in a way that absorbs DFT error into the
equilibrium energy and hence preserves overpotentials that are
consistent with the experimental values (otherwise overpotentials would
be incorrect by an amount equal to the DFT error in the equilibrium
potential). We tried to clearly state this in the captions, and have now
elaborated in the methods section to clarify further.

**Editor Requests**

**1. On the first page of your manuscript, please include the full
mailing address, including a street address, if possible, of all the
authors listed.**

Street address has been added. **2. All figures and tables should have a
corresponding call out in the text of the manuscript.**

Figure 10 is now explicitly called out in the manuscript.

**3. If the manuscript is accompanied by any Supporting Information for
Publication, a brief description of the supplementary material is
required in the manuscript. The appropriate format is: Supporting
Information. Brief statement in non-sentence format listing the contents
of the material supplied as Supporting Information.**

List of materials in the Supporting Information has been Added.

**4. Periodical references should contain authors’ surnames followed by
initials, article title, journal abbreviation, year, volume number, and
page range. The chapter on formatting requirements for referencing from
the ACS Style Guide is available at
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/bk-2006-STYG.ch014 (journal
abbreviation and full page range)**

References have been modified to have an abbreviated journal name
following the CASSI standards. Years have been added where needed. Many
articles are from journals which do not have page ranges, but rather
article numbers, so page range is not possible in all cases.

**5. Every article in ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering must
include a Table of Contents graphic page as the last page in your
manuscript labeled as “For Table of Contents Use Only.” The graphic
requested for the table of contents entry could be in the form of a
structure, graph, drawing, SEM/TEM photograph, or reaction scheme. The
graphic should be submitted with the following dimensions: 3.3 inches
(8.47 cm) wide by 1.875 inches (4.76 cm) deep. The type size of labels,
formulas, or numbers within the graphic must be legible. Tables or
spectra are not acceptable. Along with the TOC graphic, include a brief
(  20 word) synopsis, describing the graphic and explaining how the
paper relates to sustainability.**

This has been added.

**6. Supporting Information for Publication should be formatted with a
cover sheet listing authors, manuscript title, and the number of pages,
figures, and tables.**

This has been added.

**We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript, so that
processing of your manuscript may proceed without further delay.**

**Be sure that the final versions of your manuscript file and any
Supporting Information files intended for publication (including the pdf
versions, if provided) are free of all markup elements, such as track
changes, comments, colored text, highlights, and sticky notes.**

**Please include an annotated a copy of the manuscript to show revisions
and track changes for the benefit of the reviewers. This marked
manuscript should be uploaded electronically in the File Upload section
as “Supporting Information for Review Only” during submission of your
revision.**

**Thank you for considering ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering as a
forum for the publication of your work.**
